---
layout: ../../layouts/BlogLayout.astro
title: "First Blog Post - Astro Review"
pubDate: 2025-04-28
description: "Followed the Astro Blog Tutorial and also created this website! A review of the Astro Framework"
author: "Michael Craig"
images:
   - 'https://docs.astro.build/assets/rose.webp'

tags: ["Astro", "blogging", "tutorial", "learning in public"]
---

# So, What Have I Learned?

Well, I learned about Astro and what it is as a Web Framework. Astro is a lightweight framework that makes it much easier to build a website. You can utilize heavier frameworks like React along with it, so you can have the best of both worlds from a static and dynamic website/web app

The framework follows an "Islands" Architecture where an Island/component which mixes different components of a webpage to either be static or dynamic. This allows specific things to be updated only when the user sees it, so it prevents a huge Javascript payload dump that hinders performance. Since these islands can be ran on the same page and are separate from eachother, you can technically run multiple heavier frameworks like React and Vue on the same webpage.

Astro has a really interesting system where it appends on hyperlink references based on the file name, so this post, which is nested in posts, will have a hyperlink from the main directory being www.website.com/posts/post1. I think this is really intuitive for walking through a website as if it were a file system/directory, and I really love that feature! It's probably my favorite thing about the framework so far!

# What else?

Some other key features of Astro is that it uses the Markdown language to abstract items into HTML. It uses the .astro suffix similar to a component for a page, and you can do thing very similarly to a react component with Javascript, HTML and CSS (more on that later probably)